Add remaining SCE sections to merged object docs (#251)
AlexsLemonade/scpca-docs: docs/merged_objects.md

# Merged objects

> Each merged object contain _combined information_ for all individual samples in a given ScPCA project.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Each merged object contains _combined information_ for all individual samples in a given ScPCA project.
```

Examples of this include treatment or outcome.

### SingleCellExperiment dimensionality reduction results

The `reducedDim` slot of the merged object will be contain both principal component analysis (`PCA`) and `UMAP` results.

PCA results were calculated using [`batchelor::multiBatchPCA`](https://rdrr.io/bioc/batchelor/man/multiBatchPCA.html), specifying libraries as batches to ensure that each library in the merged object was equally weighted, and specifying a list of highly variable genes.

> The highly variable genes were selected with `scran::modelGeneVar`, with libraries specified as blocks, and `scran::getTopHVGs`, and they are stored in the `SingleCellExperiment` object in `metadata(merged_sce)$merged_highly_variable_genes`.

Reviewer: I don't know that we want to use the term `blocks` as that is specific to the argument name for `scran::modelGeneVar`. What about this? 
```suggestion
The highly variable genes were selected in a library-aware manner with `scran::modelGeneVar` and `scran::getTopHVGs`. 
The vector of highly variable genes are stored in the `SingleCellExperiment` object in `metadata(merged_sce)$merged_highly_variable_genes`.
```

The following command can be used to access the PCA results:

```r
reducedDim(merged_sce, "PCA")
```

> UMAP results were calculated using `scater::runUMAP()`, with the PCA results as input rather than the full gene expression matrix.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
UMAP results were calculated using `scater::runUMAP()`, with the batch-aware PCA results as input rather than the full gene expression matrix.
```

The following command can be used to access the UMAP results:

```r
reducedDim(merged_sce, "UMAP")
```

### Additional SingleCellExperiment components for CITE-seq libraries (with ADT tags)

ADT data from CITE-seq experiments, when present, is included within the merged `SingleCellExperiment` object as an "Alternative Experiment" named `"adt"`, which can be accessed with the following command:

```r
altExp(merged_sce, "adt") # adt experiment
```

Within this, the main expression matrix is again found in the `counts` assay and the normalized expression matrix is found in the `logcounts` assay.

> For each assay, each column corresponds to a cell or droplet (in the same order as the parent `SingleCellExperiment`) and each row corresponds to an antibody derived tag (ADT).
> In some cases, only some libraries in the merged object will have associated CITE-seq data.
> Libraries which do not have CITE-seq expression data are included in the assay matrices with all `NA` count values.
> Column names are again cell barcode sequences prefixed with the originating library id, e.g. `SCPCL000000-{barcode}`, and row names are the antibody targets for each ADT.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For each assay, each column corresponds to a cell or droplet (in the same order as the parent `SingleCellExperiment`) and each row corresponds to an antibody derived tag (ADT).
Column names are again cell barcode sequences prefixed with the originating library id, e.g. `SCPCL000000-{barcode}`, and row names are the antibody targets for each ADT.
In some cases, only some libraries in the merged object will have associated CITE-seq data.
Libraries which do not have CITE-seq expression data are included in the assay matrices with all `NA` count values.
```
I think I would just reorder slightly so you talk about the column/row names right after you mention what their contents are.

Only cells which are denoted as "Keep" in the `colData(merged_sce)$adt_scpca_filter` column (as described [above](#singlecellexperiment-cell-metrics)) have normalized expression values in the `logcounts` assay, and all other cells are assigned `NA` values.
However, as described in the {ref}`ADT data processing section <processing_information:Processed ADT data>`, normalization may fail under certain circumstances.
If a given ADT library failed normalization, it will also have `NA` values in the merged object.

The following additional per-cell data columns for the ADT data can be found in the main `colData` data frame (accessed with `colData(merged_sce)` [as above](#singlecellexperiment-cell-metrics)).

| Column name                | Contents                                          |
| -------------------------- | ------------------------------------------------- |
| `altexps_adt_sum`      | UMI count for CITE-seq ADTs                       |
| `altexps_adt_detected` | Number of ADTs detected per cell (ADT count > 0 ) |
| `altexps_adt_percent`  | Percent of `total` UMI count from ADT reads       |

> In addition, the following library-specific QC statistics from [`DropletUtils::cleanTagCounts()`](https://rdrr.io/github/MarioniLab/DropletUtils/man/cleanTagCounts.html) can be found in the `colData` of the `"adt"` alternative experiment, accessed with `colData(altExp(merged_sce, "adt"))`.

Reviewer: Should we specify that these were all calculated on each library prior to merging?

| `detected-SCPCL000000`  | Percent of cells in which the ADT was detected (ADT count > 0 ) |
| `target_type` | Whether each ADT is a target (`target`), negative/isotype control (`neg_control`), or positive control (`pos_control`). If this information was not provided, all ADTs will have been considered targets and will be labeled as `target` |

Finally, additional metadata for ADT processing can be found in the metadata slot of the alternative experiment

Metadata associated with {ref}`data processing <processing_information:Processing information>` is included in the `metadata` slot as a list.
Similar to the [parent experiment metadata](#singlecellexperiment-experiment-metadata), the `metadata` will contain three items: `library_id`, `sample_id`, and `library_metadata`.
The `library_metadata` contains the same list of metadata as its corresponding parent experiment library's metadata and includes one additional field `ambient_profile`, which holds a list of the ambient concentrations of each ADT for the given library.

```r
metadata(altExp(merged_sce, "adt")) # adt metadata
```

### Additional SingleCellExperiment components for multiplexed libraries

> Multiplexed libraries will contain several additional per-cell data columns in the main `colData` data frame (accessed with `colData(merged_sce)` [as above](#singlecellexperiment-cell-metrics)), including cellhash HTO QC statistics and results from demultiplexing analysis.

Reviewer: Again, I would mention that these were all calculated on each individual library before merging.

| Column name                | Contents                                          |
| -------------------------- | ------------------------------------------------- |
| `zero.ambient`   | Indicates whether the cell has zero ambient contamination   |
| `sum.controls` |  The sum of counts for all control features. Only present if negative/isotype control ADTs were used |
| `high.controls`  | Indicates whether the cell has unusually high total control counts. Only present if negative/isotype control ADTs were used |
| `ambient.scale` |  The relative amount of ambient contamination. Only present if negative/isotype control ADTs were not used |
| `high.ambient`  | Indicates whether the cell has unusually high contamination. Only present if negative/isotype control ADTs were not used |
| `discard`  | Indicates whether the cell should be discarded based on ADT QC statistics |

Metrics for each of the ADTs assayed can be found as a `DataFrame` stored as `rowData` within the alternative experiment:

```r
rowData(altExp(merged_sce, "adt")) # adt metrics
```

> This data frame contains the following columns with statistics for each ADT:

Reviewer: I think we want to specify somewhere that a `mean` and `detected` row will be present for every library included in the object.

Author: Two options for conveying this information are in this commit: https://github.com/AlexsLemonade/scpca-docs/pull/251/commits/51d8b3dd5e2dd534058ea95c8bd735ce905e1343

Which one do you prefer?

| `detected-SCPCL000000`  | Percent of cells in which the ADT was detected (ADT count > 0 ) |
| `target_type` | Whether each ADT is a target (`target`), negative/isotype control (`neg_control`), or positive control (`pos_control`). If this information was not provided, all ADTs will have been considered targets and will be labeled as `target` |

Finally, additional metadata for ADT processing can be found in the metadata slot of the alternative experiment

Metadata associated with {ref}`data processing <processing_information:Processing information>` is included in the `metadata` slot as a list.
Similar to the [parent experiment metadata](#singlecellexperiment-experiment-metadata), the `metadata` will contain three items: `library_id`, `sample_id`, and `library_metadata`.
The `library_metadata` contains the same list of metadata as its corresponding parent experiment library's metadata and includes one additional field `ambient_profile`, which holds a list of the ambient concentrations of each ADT for the given library.

```r
metadata(altExp(merged_sce, "adt")) # adt metadata
```

### Additional SingleCellExperiment components for multiplexed libraries

> 

Reviewer: I think if we are trying to mirror the contents of the [SCE file contents](https://github.com/AlexsLemonade/scpca-docs/blob/sjspielman/240-remaining-sce-sections-merged-object/docs/sce_file_contents.md#additional-singlecellexperiment-components-for-multiplexed-libraries), then we should also mention accessing the cellhash ADT.

Author: > then we should also mention accessing the cellhash ADT.

- cellhash altexp?
- I already include a sentence that there is no cellhash altexp in the merged object.

Reviewer: yes no cell hash ADT, sorry about that confusion!

Multiplexed libraries will contain several additional per-cell data columns in the main `colData` data frame (accessed with `colData(merged_sce)` [as above](#singlecellexperiment-cell-metrics)), including cellhash HTO QC statistics and results from demultiplexing analysis.
Statistics were calculated and demultiplexing was performed separately on each library before objects were merged.

| Column name                 | Contents                                                         |
| --------------------------- | ---------------------------------------------------------------- |
| `altexps_cellhash_sum`      | UMI count for cellhash HTOs                                      |
| `altexps_cellhash_detected` | Number of HTOs detected per cell (HTO count > 0 )                |
| `altexps_cellhash_percent`  | Percent of `total` UMI count from HTO reads                      |
| `hashedDrops_sampleid`      | Most likely sample as called by `DropletUtils::hashedDrops`      |
| `HTODemux_sampleid`         | Most likely sample as called by `Seurat::HTODemux`               |

> | `vireo_sampleid`            | Most likely sample as called by `vireo` (genetic demultiplexing) |

Reviewer: So I think I like how we present this in the SCE file contents, where we first talk about the HTO stats and then have a separate table where we show the demultiplexing. And we don't ever explicitly say we are doing demultiplexing, we just are adding results from demultiplexing analysis. I don't want people to think we are separating out samples when that's not the case.

Author: I updated this https://github.com/AlexsLemonade/scpca-docs/pull/251/commits/7ea39decc3dd5b7e86fd7535ea31ac1251d6c2de & https://github.com/AlexsLemonade/scpca-docs/pull/251/commits/f48ab32554da3d6e758e0afc0f375ab9a8038525

Examples of this include treatment or outcome.

### SingleCellExperiment dimensionality reduction results

> The `reducedDim` slot of the merged object will be contain both principal component analysis (`PCA`) and `UMAP` results.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `reducedDim` slot of the merged object will contain both principal component analysis (`PCA`) and `UMAP` results.
```

| Column name                | Contents                                          |
| -------------------------- | ------------------------------------------------- |
| `zero.ambient`   | Indicates whether the cell has zero ambient contamination   |
| `sum.controls` |  The sum of counts for all control features. Only present if negative/isotype control ADTs were used |
| `high.controls`  | Indicates whether the cell has unusually high total control counts. Only present if negative/isotype control ADTs were used |
| `ambient.scale` |  The relative amount of ambient contamination. Only present if negative/isotype control ADTs were not used |
| `high.ambient`  | Indicates whether the cell has unusually high contamination. Only present if negative/isotype control ADTs were not used |
| `discard`  | Indicates whether the cell should be discarded based on ADT QC statistics |

Metrics for each of the ADTs assayed can be found as a `DataFrame` stored as `rowData` within the alternative experiment:

```r
rowData(altExp(merged_sce, "adt")) # adt metrics
```

This data frame contains the following columns with statistics for each ADT.

> The columns `mean-SCPCL000000` and `detected-SCPCL000000` are present for each CITE-seq library in the merged object.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The columns `mean-SCPCL000000` and `detected-SCPCL000000` are present for each library in the merged object that has associated CITE-seq data.
```

Author: Haha, this is hilarious - this was my original sentence and I changed it! Should have stuck with my gut :)

| Column name | Contents                                                       |
| ----------- | -------------------------------------------------------------- |
| `mean-SCPCL000000`      | Mean ADT count across all cells/droplets. Only present for libraries with CITE-seq data                       |
| `detected-SCPCL000000`  | Percent of cells in which the ADT was detected (ADT count > 0 ). Only present for libraries with CITE-seq data |

> | `target_type` | Whether each ADT is a target (`target`), negative/isotype control (`neg_control`), or positive control (`pos_control`). If this information was not provided, all ADTs will have been considered targets and will be labeled as `target` |

Reviewer: I just want to note that I like including it in both places!

Author: more docs more better ✅
